---
layout: post
title:  "Installing BookStack on Ubuntu Server 22.04 with SSL"
excerpt: "BookStack is a free and open source Wiki software. Lets get it setup on Ubuntu Server 22.04 with SSL enabled."
date:   2022-07-02 23:00:00
lastmod: 2022-08-04 23:00:00
---

[My last post](/2020/05/21/ubuntu-20.04-bookstack) about this for Ubuntu 20.04 has by far been the most popular blog post that I've written so far, so lets get that guide up to date with the latest Ubuntu Server LTS and add some extra info for security and management of the server. Just in case you don't know, [BookStack](https://www.bookstackapp.com) is a free and open source Wiki software.

### Installation

The first thing you need to do is install Ubuntu Server 22.04 on any platform of your choice. Personally I am still using [Linode](https://www.linode.com) for this, however any provider or even self-hosting would work just fine for this. 

Once that is complete we can move onto installing BookStack itself, this is very easy and these couple of instructions are [directly from their Wiki](https://www.bookstackapp.com/docs/admin/installation/#ubuntu-2204).

<pre><code class="language-bash"># Download the script
wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/BookStackApp/devops/main/scripts/installation-ubuntu-22.04.sh

# Make it executable
chmod a+x installation-ubuntu-22.04.sh

# Run the script with admin permissions
sudo ./installation-ubuntu-22.04.sh
</code></pre>

Enter your domain name that the server will be hosted at when prompted.

Once that completes you should be able to access BookStack in your browser. With the default username being <code>admin@admin.com</code> and password being <code>password</code>, these should be changed, but first lets setup SSL to make secure.

### HTTPS/SSL Setup

First thing to do is install certbot and get the certificate generated.

<pre><code class="language-bash">apt install certbot

certbot certonly --webroot --agree-tos --email &lt;your email addreess&gt; -d &lt;your domain&gt; --webroot-path /var/www/bookstack/public

# Finally add the following to your crontab
# 0 0 * * * certbot renew</code></pre>

Once that is done we can configure Apache to use the certificate for Bookstack.

This is what the file should look like before:

<pre><code class="language-apacheconf">&lt;VirtualHost *:80&gt;
    ServerName &lt;your domain name&gt;

...</code></pre>

This is after making the required changes: (the only changes required happen above line 10) 
<pre><code class="language-apacheconf">&lt;VirtualHost *:80&gt;
    ServerName &lt;your domain name&gt;
    Redirect permanent / https://&lt;your domain name&gt;/
&lt;/VirtualHost&gt;

&lt;VirtualHost *:443&gt;
    SSLEngine On
    SSLCertificateFile /etc/letsencrypt/live/&lt;your domain name&gt;/fullchain.pem
    SSLCertificateKeyFile /etc/letsencrypt/live/&lt;your domain name&gt;/privkey.pem
    ServerName &lt;your domain name&gt;
                                                                                               
...</code></pre>

Finally you need to enable SSL on Apache2 and restart the service: 
<pre><code class="language-bash">a2enmod ssl

systemctl restart apache2.service</code></pre>

### Bookstack updates

The following script can be used to easily update Bookstack and clear the caches once the update completes.

<pre><code class="language-bash">cd /var/www/bookstack;
  
git pull origin release;
composer install --no-dev;
php artisan migrate;

php artisan cache:clear;
php artisan config:clear;
php artisan view:clear;
</code></pre>

### SMTP Setup
I have personally found that Amazon SES has been the easiest and cheapest way to send emails, currently this costs me around $0.03 per month. The same steps here could be setup with a Gmail account for free, however I think this is technically against their ToS so try that at your own risk.

In your <code>/var/www/bookstack/.env</code> file you can set this up with something similar to the following:

<pre><code class="language-bash"># Mail system to use
# Can be 'smtp' or 'sendmail'
MAIL_DRIVER=smtp

# Mail sender details
MAIL_FROM_NAME="Administrator"
MAIL_FROM=admin@example.com

# SMTP mail options
# These settings can be checked using the "Send a Test Email"
# feature found in the "Settings > Maintenance" area of the system.
MAIL_HOST=email-smtp.us-east-1.amazonaws.com # For gmail: smtp.gmail.com
MAIL_PORT=25
MAIL_USERNAME=[your username here]
MAIL_PASSWORD=[your password here]
MAIL_ENCRYPTION=tls
</code></pre>

### Security Settings
I would personally recommend adding the following couple of options in your <code>/var/www/bookstack/.env</code> file:

<pre><code class="language-bash">SESSION_SECURE_COOKIE=true
LOG_FAILED_LOGIN_MESSAGE="Failed login for %u" # Needed for setting up fail2ban as well
</code></pre>

I would also recommend changing these few settings in the Bookstack Settings:
1. Change the username and password of the Administrator user in <code>Settings > Users > Administrator</code>.
2. Enable <code>Multi-Factor Authentication</code> for the Administrator user.
3. Enable <code>Enable higher security image uploads</code> in <code>Settings > General > Features & Security</code>.
4. Enable <code>Requires Multi-Factor Authentication</code> for Admin users in <code>Settings > Roles > Admin</code>.

If you don't want the information on your Wiki to be public, you can disable the following settings:
1. Disable <code>Enable registration</code> in <code>Settings > General > Registration</code>.
2. Disable <code>Allow public access</code> in <code>Settings > General > Features & Security</code>.

Disabling registration doesn't mean that you can't add people to the site though. If you go to <code>Settings > Users</code> you can still invite people to your wiki using the <code>Add new user</code> button here.

### Next steps

Aaaaaaaand just like that your site should be ready to use! Its a fairly simple setup, and below you can find some extra steps to take afterwards to help keep it secure.

1. Setup ufw to block SSH from untrusted IP addresses.
2. Setup fail2ban to block brute force attacks from logging into your server.